Apollo

Apollo 11 was the first crewed lunar landing and return to Earth.

Mission Overview
The Apollo 11 mission marked the first time that human explorers traveled beyond the Earth to set foot on another body in our Solar System – the Moon. The three-person crew of Apollo 11 then returned safely to Earth, bringing home important samples and data from the lunar surface.Relevance to Astrobiology
Studying the Moon provides astrobiologists with important data about the formation and evolution of rocky bodies in solar systems. This research is also valuable in understanding the Moon’s role in the formation and evolution of the Earth, which is thus far the only example we have of a habitable world.Apollo 11 was not only a major step forward for human spaceflight. The mission (along with the additional Apollo missions that followed) returned valuable scientific data from the Moon for astrobiologists on Earth. Apollo 11, 12, 14, 15, and 16 included the Solar Wind Composition Experiment, which provided data about how plasma released from the Sun interacts with the surface of the Moon. In the experiment, solar-wind particles became embedded into foil, which was then returned to Earth for laboratory analysis. The Solar Wind Spectrometer was deployed on Apollo 12 and 15, and took continuous measurements. The Apollo 11 crew also deployed the Passive Seismic Experiment, which was designed to detect lunar “moonquakes” and provided information about the internal structure of the Moon. More advanced seismometers were deployed at the Apollo 12, 14, 15, and 16 landing sites and transmitted data to Earth until September 1977.The Soil Mechanics Investigation improved our scientific knowledge about the properties of lunar soil. The Laser Ranging Retroreflector provided details about the Moon’s orbit, including the rate at which the Moon is receding from Earth (currently 3.8 centimeters per year), and variations in the rotation of the Moon. The Lunar Surface Magnetometer measured the Moon’s magnetic field at four Apollo landing sites.

Intelligent Payload Experiment

Validating technologies for autonomous payload operations on a CubeSat

Mission OverviewIPEX was a CubeSat mission funded by NASA’s Earth Science Technology Office (ESTO). The purpose of the mission was to validate onboard instrument processing and autonomous payload operations that could be used in the future on the proposed NASA HYperSPectral Infra-Red Instrument (HyspIRI) mission.Relevance to AstrobiologyEarth is the only known example of a planet inhabited by life. Studying the Earth and its habitability through time can help astrobiologists determine what makes a planet habitable and how to identify habitable planets in our solar system and beyond.NASA Astrobiology InvolvementResearchers supported by the NASA Astrobiology Program were involved in the IPEX mission and helped to develop and test methods for automatic cloud recognition onboard the spacecraft. Clouds obscure more than half of the Earth’s surface at any given time and can interfere with data collected by missions in Earth orbit. Spacecraft that are able to automatically recognize clouds and select cloud-free areas in which to make observations could greatly improve Earth science remote sensing data.The AstrobiologistsResearchers supported in part by the former Astrobiology Science and Technology Instrument Development (ASTID) element of the NASA Astrobiology Program tested a method for automatic cloud recognition onboard IBEX.

Galileo mission

Mission to Jupiter and its mysterious moons

Mission Overview
The primary aim of NASA’s Galileo mission was to study the giant planet Jupiter and its many moons. The mission also made many valuable discoveries on route to Jupiter. Galileo was the first spacecraft to visit an asteroid, and visited two during its journey – Gaspra and Ida. Galileo also captured infrared images of clouds at Venus. Galileo also carried a small probe that it deployed and sent deep into the atmosphere of Jupiter, taking readings for almost an hour before the probe was crushed by overwhelming pressure.After discoveries including evidence for the existence of a saltwater ocean beneath the Jovian moon Europa’s icy surface, extensive volcanic processes on the moon Io and a magnetic field generated by the moon Ganymede, Galileo plunged into Jupiter’s atmosphere on September 21, 2003 to prevent an unwanted impact with Europa.Relevance to AstrobiologyNASA’s Galileo mission returned data that continues to shape astrobiology science. It was Galileo’s observations in the Jupiter system that led to the discovery that moons of the giant planet – particularly Europa – had evidence of hidden oceans beneath their surfaces. Because of Galileo, Europa is one of the most important astrobiology targets in the Solar System. These findings also expanded the search for habitable environments outside of the traditional ‘habitable zone’ of a system, the distance from a star at which liquid water can persist on the surface of a planet.NASA Astrobiology Involvement
Researchers supported by elements of the Astrobiology Program continue to use data gathered by the Galileo mission to better understand the potential habitability of jovian moons, such as Europa. The Astrobiology program devotes resources toward determining life’s potential on moons like Europa. Studies supported by the program include Earth-based research in laboratories and in the field that are used to interpret data from Galileo. The Astrobiology Program also supports the development of instruments that will be used on future missions to the Jupiter system. Data from Galileo’s journey to Jupiter, and within the Jupiter system, has also greatly informed our understanding of how and where potentially habitable worlds could form beyond our own solar system.

Deep Impact

Mission to a Comet

Mission Overview
The Deep Impact mission was the first attempt to peer beneath the surface of a comet. The craft spanned 268 million miles (431 million kilometers) of deep space in 172 days. It then released an impactor roughly the size of a coffee table, which collided with the city-sized comet, Tempel 1, on July 4, 2005, at 1:52 a.m. EDT. This hyper-speed collision between spaceborne iceberg and copper-fortified, rocket-powered probe was the first of its kind.Relevance to Astrobiology
Deep Impact provided the first analysis of materials from the interior of a comet and gathered data concerning the role of comets in the formation of planets and the origin of life. Studies on data from Deep Impact showed that the comet contained a substantial amount of organic material, and provided insight into the types of materials that comets could have delivered to the early Earth when life first originated. Deep Impact also showed that the interior was shielded from solar heating, meaning that this material from deep within the comet could be unchanged since the formation of the Solar System.NASA Astrobiology Involvement
Numerous researchers supported by the NASA Astrobiology Program were involved in the analysis of data from Deep Impact. This includes data collected by the spacecraft itself as well as astronomers who observed the comet using telescopes or other space instruments. Astrobiologists were also involved in aspects of mission design and target selection for Deep Impact.The Astrobiologists
Researchers supported by the NASA Astrobiology Institute element of the NASA Astrobiology Program used telescope observations to characterize the cometary target of the Deep Impact mission. Observations were also made to characterize the dust created following the impact with Tempel 1. These efforts were lead by Project Investigator Karen Meech at the University of Hawaii.

Dawn

Dawn provided new information about the early Solar System and formation of rocky planets by visiting protoplanets in the Main Asteroid Belt.

Mission Overview
NASA’s Dawn spacecraft visited two of the Solar System’s largest protoplanets, Vesta and Ceres. Studying the data that Dawn collected on these objects will continue to yield new information about the early Solar System and the formation of rocky planets for years to come.Relevance to Astrobiology
Vesta and Ceres are remnants of the early Solar System. Studying these objects can help astrobiologists understand how our System evolved to become the only known system to support an inhabited planet – the Earth.Both Ceres and Vesta could harbor water ice, and the European Space Agency’s Herschel telescope has identified water vapor around Ceres. Studying materials like water ice on these rocky bodies can help astrobiologists understand the inventory of molecules that could have been delivered to the early Earth from space. This information is important in determining the potential role of such materials in the origins of life on our planet.NASA Astrobiology Involvement
The Astrobiology Program supports researchers who are working with data from the Dawn mission.

Cassini-Huygens Saturn Orbiter and Titan Probe

Cassini-Huygens reveals new details about the potential for life on moons around giant planets.

Mission Overview
The Cassini-Huygens Saturn Orbiter and Titan Probe was launched in 1997 and arrived at Saturn in 2004. The mission completed operations on September 15, 2017. At Saturn, Cassini released the Huygens probe toward the planet’s gas-shrouded moon Titan. Huygens touched down on the moon on January 14, 2005, and became the first robotic explorer to land on an outer solar system body.Web Pages for accessing Cassini data:
The Planetary Data System Atmospheres Node announced the release of a preliminary version of newly designed, comprehensive web pages for accessing Cassini mission data: https://pds-atmospheres.nmsu.edu/data_and_services/atmospheres_data/Cassini/Cassini.html. These pages are the culmination of a joint effort of the Cassini team and PDS nodes to provide a central hub that links to wide range of resources from this complex mission.Relevance to Astrobiology
The Cassini-Huygens mission has provided invaluable data for astrobiologists studying life’s potential on the moons of giant planets.For the first time, astrobiologists were able to see through the thick atmosphere of Titan and study the moon’s surface, where they found lakes and seas filled with liquid hydrocarbons. Astrobiologists are studying what these liquid hydrocarbons could mean for life’s potential on Titan.Cassini-Huygens data also revealed that that Titan could have reserves of liquid water, similar to those on Jupiter’s moon Europa, trapped beneath its frigid surface. This finding opened our eyes to new possibilities for habitable environments on the mysterious moon.Cassini also witnessed icy plumes erupting from Saturn’s small moon Enceladus. When flying through the plumes, the spacecraft found evidence of saltwater and organic chemicals. This raised questions about whether or not habitable environments could exist beneath the surface of Enceladus.Cassini’s primary mission was completed in June 2008, but operations continued until September 15, 2017. Scientists will continue to work with the spectacular data collected by Cassini for years to come, helping astrobiologists understand potential habitats for life in the Solar System. This work will also help determine processes that could lead to habitability on the moons of giant planets around distant stars.NASA Astrobiology Involvement
Researchers supported by elements of the Astrobiology Program were (and continue to be) involved in numerous aspects of the Cassini-Huygens mission, from instrument development to data collection and analysis. Studying the Saturn system and the habitability of Saturn’s moons is of direct relevance to the goals of the Astrobiology Program.Thanks in part to the Cassini-Huygens mission, Enceladus and Titan are now two of astrobiology’s highest priority targets for exploration. The Astrobiology program devotes a great deal of resources toward determining life’s potential on these unique moons. Studies supported by the program include Earth-based research in laboratories and in the field that are used to interpret data being returned by the Cassini mission. The Astrobiology Program also supports the development of instruments that will be used on future missions to the Saturn system.The AstrobiologistsNAI University of Hawaii, Manoa Team member Toby Owen is a Co-I and interdisciplinary scientist on the Cassini mission, and one of the scientists that led the mission to a new start as a NASA-ESA mission.NAI Arizona State University Team member, graduate student Christopher Glein’s interpretation of Cassini data is enhanced by research into the source of material in Enceladus plumes. Glein, Mikhail Zolotov, and Everett Shock are researching the origin of Titan’s atmosphere.NAI Jet Propulsion Laboratory (Icy Worlds) Team Co-I Christophe Sotin is a Cassini-Huygens Co-Investigator. His involvement includes development of thermal evolution models of icy satellites which have been constrained by observations of their atmosphere and surface geology. Sotin is also involved in implementing the observations and processing data from the VIMS/Cassini spectrometer.NAI Jet Propulsion Laboratory (Titan) Team member Jonathan Lunine is a Titan Interdisciplinary Scientist on the Cassini Mission. Roger Yelle is a Co-I on the Cassini Ion and Neutral Mass Spectrometer. Robert West is a Co-I on both the Imaging Science System and Ultraviolet Imaging Spectrograph science teams.

Lunar Atmosphere and Dust Environment Explorer

LADEE provided new data about the lunar atmosphere and air-born dust.

Mission OverviewLADEE gathered detailed information about the structure and composition of the thin lunar atmosphere and studied how dust is being lofted into the lunar sky.Relevance to Astrobiology
Studying characteristics of the lunar atmosphere provides clues about similar processes on other rocky bodies in the Solar System, including large asteroids, Mercury, and the moons of outer planets. Many of these celestial bodies are relevant as targets of astrobiology research.NASA Astrobiology Involvement
The Astrobiology Program supports efforts to develop models based on data from the LADEE mission. These models are used to study the molecular composition of the lunar atmosphere.The AstrobiologistsNAINASA Ames Research Center Team Co-I Davis is developing models to ascertain the molecular composition of the tenuous lunar atmosphere by analyzing the scattering data from satellite instrumentation.

Interior Exploration using Seismic Investigations, Geodesy and Heat Transport

Insight into the early evolution of terrestrial planets.

Mission Overview
InSight is a NASA Discovery Program mission that has placed a single geophysical lander on Mars to study its deep interior. The mission is not just a Mars explorer, it will address one of the most fundamental issues of planetary and solar system science – understanding the processes that shaped the rocky planets of the inner solar system (including Earth) more than four billion years ago.By using sophisticated geophysical instruments, InSight is delving deep beneath the surface of Mars, detecting the fingerprints of the processes of terrestrial planet formation, as well as measuring the planet’s “vital signs”: Its “pulse” (seismology), “temperature” (heat flow probe), and “reflexes” (precision tracking). Relevance to Astrobiology
InSight seeks to answer one of science’s most fundamental questions: How did the terrestrial planets form? The formation and history of Mars itself is of great interest to astrobiology, and essential in understanding habitable environments on ancient Mars. Insight will also provide important information about the general principles behind terrestrial planet formation. This data is critical in understanding the history of our own solar system, as well as the diversity of terrestrial planets that could exist throughout the Universe.NASA Astrobiology Involvement
The InSight mission will return valuable data for many elements of the NASA Astrobiology Program, and will feed into many areas of astrobiology research. Mars is a target of high interest for astrobiology, and the study of terrestrial planet formation is important in understanding the potential for habitable worlds around distant stars.

Mariner 4

Mariner 4 returned the first pictures of the martian surface, and changed the way astrobiologists thought about life's potential on Mars.

Mission Overview
One of the great successes of the early American space program, the Mariner 4 mission journeyed to Mars — making its closest approach on July 15, 1965 — and took the first photos of another planet from space. Relevance to Astrobiology
By providing the first close-up images of Mars, Mariner 4 redefined the way astrobiologists viewed the red planet. Until Mariner 4, scientists on Earth had little information about the conditions present at the martian surface. Importantly, Mariner 4 identified geological signs that water may have once flowed on the planet’s surface, information that would shape all Mars missions that followed.Images from the Mariner missions also helped astrobiologists find similar landscapes on Earth where they could test equipment for future missions and study the potential for life in Mars-like conditions.

Kepler and K2

Kepler data is used to search for Earth-sized planets around distant stars.

Mission Overview
The Kepler Mission was a space observatory designed to survey a specific portion of our region of the Milky Way galaxy. An important part of Kepler’s work was the identification of Earth-size planets around distant stars. Kepler lost a second spacecraft reaction wheel in May of 2013, which effectively ended data collection in the original Kepler field after 4 years of continuous monitoring. However, all other Kepler assets remained intact and were used for extended observations, and dubbed the K2 mission. On October 30, 2018, NASA announced that Kepler had run out of fuel and was being retired within its safe orbit, away from Earth. Kepler left a legacy of more than 2,600 exoplanet discoveries.Relevance to Astrobiology
Kepler searched for Earth-sized planets that orbit in the habitable zone of their host star. Such observations are directly relevant to the study of life’s potential in the Universe, and the search for life beyond Earth.By October 2018, and after nine years in deep space collecting data, Kepler had discovered more than 2,600 planets outside our solar system. Amongst the Kepler discoveries is Kepler-186f, the first validated Earth-size planet in the habitable zone of a star other than the Sun. The vast amount of data collected by Kepler will continued to be analyzed by researchers in the years to come, providing further discoveries that will help to guide the future direction of astrobiology science.Kepler’s current count of confirmed exoplanets and planet candidates can be found in the NASA Exoplanet Archive at: https://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu/docs/counts_detail.htmlNASA Astrobiology Involvement
Numerous researchers supported by the Astrobiology Program are working with data from Kepler to discover potentially habitable exoplanets. Astrobiologists also use this data to develop new techniques for studying exoplanets in greater and greater detail. This work will inform future missions to characterize exoplanets and exomoons, and possibly identify signs of life by analyzing attributes of these distant worlds, such as atmospheric composition.The AstrobiologistsVPL at the University of Washington (NExSS)  Much of the research undertaken by the VPL team is focused on reexamining the limits of the habitable zone and the stellar parameters that affect planetary habitability. Results from this research are relevant in constraining the potential habitability of Earth-sized planets discovered by the Kepler mission. Additionally, VPL Team member Eric Agol, who is also a Kepler guest observer, discovered the most potentially habitable planet to date in the Kepler data, and continues to develop planet detection algorithms to improve the science yield from the Kepler data. VPL Team member Lucianne Walkowicz (Berkeley) is also a member of the Kepler scientific analysis team and works on understanding the photometric variability and flare frequency and strength for stars that serve as planetary hosts. VPL Team member Drake Deming, with graduate student Holly Short, is developing new techniques to derive planetary atmospheric characteristics from combined Kepler data, also increasing the science yield of the mission.NAI Carnegie Institution of Washington Team member Alan Boss is a collaborator on the Kepler mission. Both he and Post Doctoral Fellow Chris Stark are active participants in the Kepler mission.Modeling by NAINASA Ames Research Center Co-I Jack Lissauer is being used to interpret observations of planets that Kepler discovers using theoretical models.NAI Massachusetts Institute of Technology Team members Dimitar Sasselov and Lisa Kaltenegger are Kepler Investigators.NAI Pennsylvania State University Team members Jim Kasting, Jason Wright, Suvrath Mahadevan, and Steinn Sigurdsson are all using Kepler data and results in their Biosignatures in Extraterrestrial Settings work.

Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing Satellite

LCROSS identified water ice and a water cycle on the Moon, providing clues about how rocky bodies might become habitable for life.

Mission OverviewLCROSS set out to confirm the presence or absence of water ice in a permanently shadowed crater at the moon’s south pole.On October 9, 2009, the vehicle’s spent Centaur upper stage impacted the crater Cabeus. Then the Shepherding Spacecraft descended through Centaur’s ejectate plume, collecting and relaying data before impacting the lunar surface six minutes later.Relevance to AstrobiologyLCROSS successfully discovered water in permanently shadowed craters, and also found that the Moon is chemically active and has an active water cycle in lunar shadows.Twenty percent of the material kicked up by the LCROSS impact was volatiles, and observations suggest that these materials originated from sources like comets and asteroids.Understanding the processes and environments that determine where water ice is present on the Moon, how water was delivered to the moon, and its active water cycle can provide important information about how rocky bodies formed and evolved in the Solar System. This gives astrobiologists a view into the early Solar System and the potential conditions and inventory of materials available for the origin of life on the early Earth and other solar system bodies.NASA Astrobiology Involvement
Astrobiologists supported by the Astrobiology program are involved in analyzing data returned by the LCROSS mission. This includes constructing models of the plume that was created when LCROSS impacted the lunar surface.The AstrobiologistsNAINASA Ames Research Center Team member Co-I Sanford Davis has published models of the LCROSS impact and is analyzing flash data from the impact.NAI Virtual Planetary Laboratory (VPL) at University of Washington Team Tyler Robinson, Victoria Meadows and William Sparks collaborated with LCROSS mission scientist Ennico to use VPL models to interpret observations of the Earth taken by LCROSS prior to impacting the lunar surface. In the process they discovered a calibration error in the LCROSS spectral data and were able to determine a correction.The LCROSS data were also used to validate the VPL Earth model as a function of phase, showing that they were able to accurately predict the magnitude, spectral behavior and phase-dependence of glint from the Earth’s oceans as a potential sign of habitability for a distant world.

Compton Gamma Ray Observatory

Observing the high-energy Universe

Mission Overview
The Compton Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) was a sophisticated satellite observatory dedicated to observing the high-energy Universe. It was the second in NASA’s program of orbiting “Great Observatories”, following the Hubble Space Telescope.Relevance to Astrobiology
While Hubble’s instruments operate at visible and ultraviolet wavelengths, Compton carried a collection of four instruments which together could detect an unprecedented broad range of high-energy radiation called gamma rays. The mission provided insights into the basic structure of the Universe and distribution of high-energy radiation that could play a role in the habitability of planets.NASA Astrobiology Involvement
Data from CGRO informs numerous studies supported by the NASA Astrobiology Program. This data is used in models that help researchers better understand the Universe and the conditions in which planetary systems form and evolve. Scientific results from CGRO are helping exoplanet researchers determine the types and locations of systems that could support habitable planets.

Viking Project

NASA's Viking Project was the first mission to reach the martian surface and the first to search for evidence of life on Mars.

Mission OverviewNASA’s Viking Project found a place in history when it became the first U.S. mission to land a spacecraft safely on the surface of Mars and return images of the surface. Two identical spacecraft, each consisting of a lander and an orbiter, were built. Each orbiter-lander pair flew together and entered Mars orbit; the landers then separated and descended to the planet’s surface.The Viking 1 lander touched down on the western slope of Chryse Planitia (the Plains of Gold), while the Viking 2 lander settled down at Utopia Planitia. The last data from Viking Lander 2 arrived at Earth on April 11, 1980. Viking Lander 1 made its final transmission to Earth Nov. 11, 1982.Relevance to Astrobiology
Besides taking digital images and collecting other science data on the Martian surface, the two landers conducted three biology experiments designed to look for possible signs of life. These experiments discovered unexpected and enigmatic chemical activity in the Martian soil, but provided no clear evidence for the presence of living microorganisms in soil near the landing sites.In order to test instruments for the Viking Program, early astrobiologists and exobiologists at NASA traveled to some of Earth’s most remote environments, including the Dry Valleys of Antarctica and the Atacama desert in Chile. These places are thought to be some of the best analogs for Mars that we have on Earth, and studying life in such locations has become an important element of astrobiology research at NASA.The Viking results also taught scientists a great deal about how little we knew about life on Earth and how to detect it. To this day, the results are helping to shape the development of life detection strategies and equipment at NASA and other international agencies.NASA Astrobiology InvolvementNASA’s Viking Project took place before NASA’s Astrobiology Program was founded, but many scientists from its precursor, NASA’s Exobiology Program, participated in the mission. Viking was NASA’s first attempt to search for life on another planet, and was thereby the first mission dedicated to astrobiology.The Astrobiologists
Some key figures behind Viking’s biology experiments include:Klaus Biemann, Professor Emeritus of chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and PI for the Gas Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer.Norman Horowitz (1915-2005), former head of the Biology Division at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratories, Principal Investigator (PI) for the Pyrolytic Release experiment.Harold P. Klein, Biology Team Leader for the Viking project, established the Exobiology and Life Sciences programs at NASA Ames.Gilbert V. Levin, former NASA scientist and engineer, PI for the Labeled Release experiment.Vance Oyama (1922-1998), former NASA Ames biologist and PI for the Gas Exchange experiment.Wolf Vishniac (1922-1973), Professor of Biology at the University of Rochester and PI of the ‘Wolf Trap’ instrument (later removed from the Viking payload).

Mars Exploration Rovers

The MER rovers have shaped our understanding of Mars’ geology and past environments at the surface that may have been suitable for life.

Mission Overview
NASA’s twin Mars Exploration Rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, launched in the summer of 2003. Spirit landed on the broad plain of Gusev Crater on January 4, 2004. Opportunity struck a ‘hole-in-one’ landing, bouncing across Meridiani Planum directly into tiny Eagle Crater on January 25, 2004.The MER rovers were designed to last for 90 martian days, however both robotic explorers far outlasted their original missions and spent years collecting data at the surface of Mars. Spirit’s wheels carried across the plains of Gusev Crater for over six years, with its last confirmed signal on March 22, 2010. Opportunity roved Meridiani Planum for an incredible fifteen years, sending its last signal on June 10, 2018.Opportunity was enveloped in a planet-wide dust storm on Mars in June of 2018. Because the rover relied on solar panels for energy, it was unable to charge its batteries under the dust-laden skies. Engineers attempted to restore contact with the rover for many months, but the mission was declared complete in February of 2019.Relevance to Astrobiology
A primary objective of the MER mission was to search for and characterize a wide range of rocks and soils that hold clues to past water activity on Mars. Studying the history of water on Mars is essential in determining whether or not the planet once supported environments that could have been habitable for life as we know it.NASA Astrobiology Involvement
The NASA Astrobiology Program played an important role in the development of the MER mission, and supported the development of instruments carried onboard the rovers. The Astrobiology Program also funds astrobiologists who work with the immense amount of data returned by the MER mission. This data has been used to identify environments that may have supported conditions suitable for life in Mars’ past and will guide the future of Mars exploration for decades to come.The AstrobiologistsNAINASA Ames Research Center Team PI David Des Marais served on the MER Science Operations Working Group as a Lead of the Long Term Planning Theme Group. In addition, Richard Morris was a member of the MER Moessbauer instrument team. The methodology developed through this project has helped to create interpretive context for mineralogy data produced by the instrument suite on MER.NAI Massachusetts Institute of Technology Team member John Grotzinger was a Participating Scientist; Andrew Knoll was a Co-I on MER.NAI Arizona State University Team member Phil Christensen was a Co-I on MER, responsible for the Mini-TES instruments. Co-I Jack Farmer was a Participating Scientist, Geology Theme Group member and a Long-term Planning Lead for MER since the mission began in 2004, and was been continuously involved with surface operations since that time. Research by Farmer, Christensen, Mikhail Zolotov and others into geochemical scenarios accounting for observed Mars mineralogy aids in interpreting data from this and other Mars missions. Research into the stoichiometry of life led by Co-Is Jim Elser and Everett Shock helps to assess the habitability of the environments that MER explored.

Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy

SOFIA is making observations of new solar systems, complex molecules in space, and planets in our own Solar System.

Mission OverviewSOFIA is a joint program between NASA and the German Aerospace Center (DLR), and is a telescope capable of making observations from onboard an airplane. SOFIA is comprised of a Boeing 747SP aircraft modified to accommodate a 2.5 meter gyro-stabilized telescope.Relevance to AstrobiologySOFIA is the largest airborne observatory in the world. From high in Earth’s atmosphere, the mission can make observations that are impossible for even the largest ground-based telescopes on the highest mountain peaks. Many of SOFIA’s target observations are directly relevant to the Astrobiology Program:- Study the formation of new solar systems
- Identify complex molecules in space
- Observe planets, comets, and asteroids in the Solar SystemNASA Astrobiology Involvement
Astrobiologists supported by elements of the NASA Astrobiology Program are working with data returned by the SOFIA mission.The AstrobiologistsNAI Carnegie Institution of Washington Team Weinberger is PI of the Cycle 2 general observer program 02_0050, “Watching the Collisional Cascade of a Giant Impact”.NAINASA Ames Research Center Team Scott Sandford is PI on a Second Generation SOFIA Facility Instrument proposal for the SIRIS instrument.

Organism/Organic Exposure to Orbital Stresses

O/OREOS studies how living organisms are affected by the space environment. 

Mission Overview
O/OREOS is a small satellite that weighs approximately 12 pounds and carried two astrobiology experiments into orbit at around 400 miles above the Earth’s surface. It was the first nanosatellite to conduct autonomous biological and chemical measurements in the exosphere.Relevance to Astrobiology
O/OREOS carried two distinct astrobiology science experiments, all onboard a satellite that is roughly the size of a loaf of bread.The Space Environment Survivability of Live Organisms (SESLO) experiment carried two populations of the microbe Bacillus subtilis into orbit and monitored how the space environment affected their survival. One set was a naturally occurring strain of B. subtilis, and the second was a radiation-resistant mutant strain.The Space Environment Viability of Organics (SEVO) experiment monitored the stability and changes in four classes of organic molecules during spaceflight.Without returning samples to Earth, O/OREOS traveled around our planet just above the thermosphere and conducted autonomous biological and chemical measurements for 6 months.NASA Astrobiology Involvement
O/OREOS was directly supported by the Astrobiology Program through all stages of the mission’s development, launch and operation. O/OREOS was a demonstration flight of the ‘small payload initiative’ for the former Astrobiology Science and Technology Instrument Development (ASTID) element of NASA’s Astrobiology Program.The Astrobiologists
O/OREOS was a demonstration flight of the ‘small payload initiative’ for the former Astrobiology Science and Technology Instrument Development (ASTID) element of NASA’s Astrobiology Program.NAINASA Ames Research Center Team and Science Team member Andrew Mattioda published The O/OREOS Mission: First Science Data from the Space Environment Viability of Organics (SEVO) Payload, Mattioda et. al., Astrobiology. September 2012, Vol. 12, No. 9: 841-853

Phoenix Mars Mission

Phoenix was designed to study the history of water and habitability potential in the Martian arctic's ice-rich soil.

Mission OverviewLaunched on August 4, 2007, the Phoenix Mars Mission was the first mission in NASA’s Scout Program. Phoenix was designed to study the history of water and habitability potential in the martian arctic’s ice-rich soil. Phoenix landed May 25, 2008, farther north than any previous spacecraft to land on the martian surface.Relevance to AstrobiologyPhoenix provided invaluable data about the northern polar region of Mars. The lander verified the presence of water-ice in the Martian subsurface, and returned more than 25,000 pictures from sweeping vistas to near the atomic level using the first atomic force microscope ever used outside Earth. Phoenix provided data for astrobiologists concerning the history of water on Mars and whether or not the martian arctic could have supported habitable environments in the past. The mission documented mildly alkaline soil unlike any found by earlier Mars missions; found small concentrations of salts that could be nutrients for life. Phoenix also discovered perchlorate salt, which has implications for ice and soil properties; and found calcium carbonate, a marker of effects of liquid water. NASA Astrobiology InvolvementNumerous researchers supported by elements of the NASA Astrobiology Program have been involved in analyzing data returned by the Phoenix lander. Mars is a target of high interest for astrobiology, and the primary goals of astrobiology at NASA were key to Phoenix’s mission design and implementation.The AstrobiologistsResearchers supported by the Exobiology and Evolutionary Biology program, including Nilton Renno of the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, served as co-investigators on the Phoenix mission’s science team.

Pioneer Venus Orbiter

NASA's early missions to Venus helped to solidify the idea that Mars was a better place to look for potential past or present life.

Mission Overview
The Pioneer Venus mission consisted of two components, launched separately: an Orbiter and a Multiprobe. The Pioneer Venus Orbiter was launched on May 20, 1978, and inserted into an elliptical orbit around Venus on December 4, 1978. The Orbiter was a flat cylinder 2.5 m in diameter and 1.2 m high. The Pioneer Venus Multiprobe launched on August 8, 1978, and consisted of a bus that carried one large and three small atmospheric probes. The large probe was released on November 16, 1978 and the three small probes on November 20. All four probes entered the Venus atmosphere on December 9, followed by the bus. Relevance to Astrobiology
The Pioneer Venus project was one of many early NASA missions to the planet Venus. When NASA first began, scientists still wondered about life’s potential on Venus, a planet of similar size to the Earth. After missions visited the planet and returned data about the surface and atmosphere, scientists began to realize that Mars was a better target in our search for past or present life in the Solar System.However, Venus provided invaluable data about habitability on rocky planets. Scientists were able to compare atmospheric and surface processes on Venus and the Earth, providing them with the chance to perform comparative planetology. What we’ve learned about Venus has helped shape our understanding of what makes the Earth habitable for life as we know it.Pioneer Venus ScienceThe Pioneer Venus Orbiter carried seventeen science experiments onboard:The Pioneer Venus Multiprobe delivered an additional seven science experiments onboard the large atmospheric probe:

Stardust

NASA's comet sample return mission

Mission OverviewThe primary goal of the Stardust mission was to collect samples of a comet and return them to Earth for laboratory analysis. In 2004, Stardust made a close flyby of comet Wild-2, collecting comet and interstellar dust in a substance called aerogel. Stardust was the first spacecraft to return a cometary sample and extraterrestrial material from outside the orbit of the moon to Earth.Two years later, the samples made it back to Earth in a return capsule that landed in the Utah desert. The Stardust mission samples indicated that some comets may have included materials ejected from the early sun and may have formed very differently than scientists had theorized. The spacecraft, which was still operational, was later recycled for the Stardust-NExT mission, which flew by comet Tempel 1 on Feb. 14, 2011.Relevance to AstrobiologyComets are ancient bodies of frozen ice and dust that formed beyond the orbit of the most distant planet. They were expected to contain materials that the Solar System formed from, preserved in ice for billions of years. Studying comets can help astrobiologists understand the processes behind planet formation in our solar system, conditions that led to habitability on Earth, and the potential role of comets in delivering key ingredients for the origins of life. NASA Astrobiology InvolvementResearchers supported by NASA Astrobiology through the Emerging Worlds Program, the Laboratory Analysis of Returned Samples (LARS) Program, and the NAI had a vital role in development, operation, and data analysis of the Stardust mission.The AstrobiologistsResearchers working on projects funded through the Emerging Worlds Program include: Diane H. Wooden at the NASA Ames Research Center (ARC), Don Brownlee at the University of Washington, David Joswiak at the University of Washington, Ann N. Nguyen at NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC), Scott Messenger at NASAJSC, and Hope A. Ishii at the University of Hawaii.Researchers working on projects funded through the Laboratory Analysis of Returned Samples (LARS) Program include: Don Brownlee at the University of Washington, David Joswiak at the University of Washington, Ann N. Nguyen at NASA’s Johnson Space Center, Scott Messenger at NASAJSC, Hope A. Ishii at the University of Hawaii, and Michael E. Zolensky at NASAJSC.The NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI) element of the NASA Astrobiology Program supported Stardust through a number of the NAI teams. Don Brownlee at the University of Washington Team served as Stardust Principal Investigar. Scott Sandford of the NASA Ames Research Center Team served as a Co-Investigator and was heavily involved in the analysis of samples. George Cody of the Carnegie Institution of Washington Team studied organics captured from come Wild 2.

MErcury Surface, Space ENvironment, GEochemistry, and Ranging

Unlocking the mysteries of planet Mercury

Mission OverviewMErcury Surface, Space ENvironment, GEochemistry, and Ranging (MESSENGER) was a NASA Discovery mission that conducted the first orbital study of our solar system’s innermost planet.Relevance to AstrobiologyMercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars are terrestrial (rocky) planets. Among these, Mercury is an extreme: the smallest, the densest (after correcting for self-compression), the one with the oldest surface, the one with the largest daily variations in surface temperature, and the least explored. Understanding this “end member” among the terrestrial planets is crucial to developing a better understanding of how the planets in our Solar System formed and evolved. This information can also help astrobiologists further understand the variety of terrestrial planets that could potentially form around other stars.NASA Astrobiology InvolvementAstrobiologists supported by the NASA Astrobiology Program are involved in the analysis and interpretation of data from the MESSENGER spacecraft.The AstrobiologistsResearchers supported by the Exobiology & Evolutionary Biology program element of the NASA Astrobiology Program, including Oleg Abramov (Astrogeology Science Center, USGS) and Stephen J. Mojzsis (CU Boulder), have worked with data from the MESSENGER Mission to better understand the history and formation of Mercury, our solar system’s smallest terrestrial planet.

Deep Impact Extended Investigation (DIXI) and Extrasolar Planet Observation and Characterization (EPOCh)

Two intriguing investigations -- One flight-proven spacecraft

Mission Overview
The EPOXI mission recycled the Deep Impact spacecraft, which had formerly visited comet Tempel 1, to visit a second comet, Hartley 2. The Nov. 4, 2010, flyby marked only the fifth time a comet had been visited by a spacecraft. EPOXI recycled the Deep Impact spacecraft to complete two additional missions: the Deep Impact Extended Investigation (DIXI) and Extrasolar Planet Observation and Characterization (EPOCh). DIXI focused on a flyby of the comet, Hartley 2. Previously, Deep Impact had visited the comet Tempel 1. The EPOCh used Deep Impact’s photographic instruments to identify and study extrasolar planets.Relevance to Astrobiology
Comets are ancient bodies of frozen ice and dust that formed beyond the orbit of the most distant planet. Studying comets can help astrobiologists understand the processes behind planet formation in our solar system, conditions that led to habitability on Earth, and the potential role of comets in delivering key ingredients for the origins of life.Observations of extrasolar planets are essential in determining the potential habitability of worlds beyond our solar system. Data from EPOXI adds to a large and growing body of knowledge concerning the diversity of planets in the Universe and the conditions in which they form and evolve.NASA Astrobiology Involvement
Numerous researchers supported by the NASA Astrobiology Program were involved in the analysis of data from EPOXI. This includes scientific teams studying comets as well as those focused on extrasolar planet research.

Galaxy Evolution Explorer

Understanding how the galaxies were formed

Mission Overview
The Galaxy Evolution Explorer was an orbiting space telescope designed to measure the history of star formation in the Universe by observing the Universe in ultraviolet wavelengths. In addition to paving the way for future ultraviolet missions, the space telescope allowed astronomers to uncover mysteries about the early Universe and how it evolved, as well as better characterize phenomena like black holes and dark matter. The mission was extended three times over a period of 10 years before it was decommissioned in June 2013.Relevance to Astrobiology
Data from the GALEX mission informs a number of studies supported by the NASA&nbspAstrobiology Program. Researchers use this data to better understand the Universe and the conditions in which planetary systems form and evolve. Scientific results from GALEX are helping exoplanet researchers determine the conditions necessary for the evolution of habitable worlds. Using its ultraviolet imaging, GALEX was used to test planet detection methods based on changes in a stars activity caused by tidal or magnetic interactions with planets in orbit.The AstrobiologistsGALEX data has contributed to studies performed by researchers supported by elements of the NASA&nbspAstrobiology Program, including the Habitable Worlds Program and NExSS.

